---
title: Computing a Number Theoretic Sum
description: Accidentally created a very cool problem with a satisfying solution. Features Dirichlet products, a lot.
date: '2025-01-04'
categories:
  - math
  - cs
  - algorithms
published: true
---

<script>
    import { Blockquote, Img } from "flowbite-svelte";
</script>

While I was attempting this [problem](https://dmoj.ca/problem/mathp16), I misread it after writing it down on paper and instead solved

$$

S = \sum_{xy \leq n} xy \gcd(x, y)

$$

Here the sum is over positive integers $(x, y)$ satisfying $xy \leq n$, rather than $x, y \leq n$. In my opinion it turned out more interesting than the original one, so I wanted to share.

> Compute $$S = \sum_{xy \leq n} xy \gcd(x, y)$$ in sublinear time. Here I present $\mathcal{O}(n^{2/3})$ but it can be much faster.
> 
> --Source: Accidental misread

## Solution


Setting up notation first, let $M$ be set of multiplicative functions, and \* be the Dirichlet
product, then $(M, *)$ is an abelian group. Let $\epsilon$, $1$,
$I$, $\tau$, $\sigma$, $\mu$, $\phi$ be the $*$-identity ($1$-indicator), constant $1$,
identity, divisor count, divisor sum, Mobius, and totient functions
respectively. Note that they are all multiplicative.

Write $k = xy$ so that we can iterate over $k$ as follows:
$$
S = \sum_{k \leq n} k \sum_{d \mid k} \gcd(d, k/d)
$$

<Blockquote border bg class="p-4 my-4">
    Key Lemma

    $$
    \sum_{d^2 \mid k} \tau(k/d^2) \phi(d) = \sum_{d \mid k} \gcd(d, k/d)
    $$

    Note here that $d$ does not represent the same iterator, but I kept the variable name anyways.
</Blockquote>

*Proof of Lemma.* 
A cool fact is that any sum of a product of multiplicative functions with the form of the left side is multiplicative. We can define here

$$
f(d^2) = \begin{cases}
0 & \text{$d$ is not a square} \\
\phi(d) & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$

Note that $f$ is multiplicative, and the left side is actually $f * \tau$, making it multiplicative.

We can verify the right side is multiplicative too, with just the textbook approach. One can notice that if $\gcd(p, q) = 1$, $d \mid pq \implies d = rs$, where $r \mid p$ and $s \mid q$. Also, $\gcd(rs, pq/(rs)) = \gcd(r, p/r) \gcd(s, q/s)$. Therefore, 
$$
\sum_{d \mid pq} \gcd(d, pq/d) = \sum_{r \mid p} \gcd(r, p/r) \sum_{s \mid q} \gcd(s, q/s)
$$

It remains to simply check both sides coincide at prime powers:
$$
\sum_{i \leq \lfloor a/2\rfloor} \tau(p^{a - 2i}) \phi(p^i) = \tau(p^a) + \sum_{1 \leq i \leq \lfloor a/2\rfloor} (a - 2i + 1) p^{i - 1}(p - 1)
$$
$$
= \sum_{i \leq \lfloor a/2\rfloor - 1} 2p^i + (a - 2\lfloor a/2\rfloor + 1) p^{\lfloor a/2\rfloor} = \sum_{i \leq a} p^{\min(i, a - i)}
$$

So we're done. The sum telescopes in the middle. $\square$


Therefore
$$
S = \sum_{k \leq n} k \sum_{d^2 \mid k} \tau(k/d^2) \phi(d)
$$

The goal here was to turn the sum into one consisting of multiplicative functions, so we can try applying Dirichlet's Hyperbola Method.
We can quickly make the observation $d^2 \leq k \leq n$, and it looks promising to try iterating over
$d \leq \sqrt{n}$ instead:

$$
S = \sum_{d \leq \sqrt{n}} \phi(d) \sum_{d^2 \mid k} k \tau(k/d^2)
$$

Now $k$ has a really simple characterization: it is just $d^2 \alpha$
for $\alpha \leq n/d^2$. Let's iterate over $\alpha$,

$$
S = \sum_{d \leq \sqrt{n}} \phi(d) d^2 \sum_{\alpha \leq n/d^2} \alpha \tau(\alpha)
$$

So we would be happy if we can compute prefix sums of $I \tau$ quickly,
luckily it is multiplicative and simple enough, so let's try to write it as a Dirichlet product:

$$
I\tau = I * I = I * \mu * \sigma = \phi * \sigma
$$

At this point we are almost at the end, as many methods to calculate prefix sums of $\phi$ and $\sigma$ are well known:

$\sigma = I * 1$, which decomposes it into two functions whose prefix sums can be computed in
$\mathcal{O}(1)$. With the hyperbola method we can compute prefix
sums of $\sigma$ in $\sqrt{n}$. 

Prefix sums of $\phi$ can be computed in $\mathcal{O}(n^{2/3})$ by [linear sieving](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/54090) the first $n^{2/3}$ values. Then using a recursion with another hyperbola method on the rest, with $\phi = 1 * \mu$, while making use of the fact that there are $\Theta(\sqrt{n})$ unique values of $\lfloor n/i \rfloor$. See [here](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/117635)! This balances out to $$\mathcal{O} \left(\sum^{x^{1/3}} \sqrt{x/i} \right) = \mathcal{O}(x^{2/3})$$. In fact, through the recursion we get all the "important values", the prefix sums up to $\phi(\lfloor n/i \rfloor)$, for free.

So now using the Hyperbola Method to consolidate $I \tau$, choose splitting point $pq = s$:

$$
\sum^s I\tau = \sum^{p} \phi(i) \sum^{s/i} \sigma(j) + \sum^{q} \sigma(i) \sum^{s/i} \phi(j) -\sum^{q} \sigma(i) \sum^{p} \phi(j)
$$

As the computation of $\phi$'s prefix sums dominate, we can simply pick $p = q = \sqrt{s}$ while also not worrying about quickly obtaining all the important values of $\sigma$, which only contributes $\mathcal{O}(\sqrt{n} \log n)$.

Now to resolve

$$
S = \sum_{d \leq \sqrt{n}} \phi(d) d^2 \sum_{\alpha \leq n/d^2} \alpha \tau(\alpha)
$$

We can linear sieve $\phi$ for
the other part in the $S$ sum at no asymptotic cost. Thus the total cost of
this is
$$
\sum_{d \leq \sqrt{n}} \mathcal{O}((n/d^2)^{2/3}) = \mathcal{O}(n^{2/3})
$$ 
<div class="w-full flex justify-end"> 

$\square$ 

</div>

### Further Improvements
I'm sure that many improvements can be made to this. I haven't explored too much about it, but here's some immediate ideas.

- A quick skim of search results tell me $\phi$ and $\sigma$ can be calculated even quicker using more advanced methods that I can't understand. 
- I have seen this [remarkable blog](https://www.cnblogs.com/zkyJuruo/p/17544928.html), showing how to compute the "important values" of the Dirichlet product of two functions whose "important values" we already know in $\mathcal{O}(\sqrt{n} \text{ polylog } n)$. Combined with the above the whole algorithm can also be $\mathcal{O}(\sqrt{n} \text{ polylog } n)$.
- A non-improvement: Although $\phi I^2$, the other part of the multiplicand, is also multiplicative, the Hyperbola Method is limited by a $\sqrt{n}$ time. So trying to use it on the overall sum $S$ with a fast $\phi I^2$ prefix sum gains nothing as long as $I\tau = \phi * \sigma$ is used. So hypothetically if $\phi$ and $\sigma$ we can apply similar techniques on it.
- If anyone wants to correct me or share any improvements please do. With that being said I should implement blog commenting.